So as mentioned, I want to switch the way we handle this form.
Thus far, we are using the template driven approach which means we let Angular detect the form and
we register controls with ngModel
and that was working fine thus far
but now that I want to add a little bit more advanced features to the form, like my own validator, it's
way easier to do this if we switch to the reactive forms approach.
Now if that doesn't tell you anything, I as always strongly recommend checking out my complete guide on
Angular, there I dive into this in-depth.
In the end, the main difference is that with the template driven approach which we're currently using,
we let Angular infer everything, with the reactive approach,
we clearly define everything in our Typescript code and then just tell Angular which of our defined
controls, defined by us in Typescript maps to which input here. To use that reactive approach,
I first of all need to import something into my app module.
Thus far, we import the forms module and it's added here to the imports array
and this unlocks the template driven approach.
Now I will actually import the reactive forms module and I'll replace the forms module with that, not
just up here of course but also down here in the imports array.
Now we unlock this and what we also now did is we basically disabled our ngModel here,
so if I now would reload, we would get an error that there is no directive with export as set to ngForm,
that already fails
but it would also fail
regarding ngModel because this is now not how we handle forms anymore.
So let's get rid of ngModel on the first input,
let's also get rid on this local reference post form equals ngForm,
we'll also not use that anymore.
Additionally this here won't work anymore,
accessing the title with ngModel, that's now gone because we now don't use ngModel
anymore and these validators, we also have to remove them, we'll add validators differently.
So therefore of course our form will be broken but we'll fix it soon.
For the text area, let's remove ngModel, let's remove the required validator and let's remove that
content local reference there too. Let's remove the argument we passed to onSave post because we don't
have access to the form in the template anymore
and now of course in Typescript, we need to change the way we create our form.
So here, we now create our form programmatically.
This means that first of all, we create our form and store it in a property,
this will be of type form group and form group needs to be imported from @angular/forms.
So this import here needs to be added,
you can actually now remove that ngForm input though. Form group is simply the top level object
for a form you could say, a form group groups
all the controls of a form. You can also have sub-groups in a form if you want to, well then group controls
within a form but the form overall is just one big group and we will work with that.
So now we get that form
but of course it's undefined,
we need to initialize that form and clearly define which controls we have
and we can do that in ngOnInit,
that's always a great place for such initialization tasks. There,
we want to do that initialization, there
we can do that initialization right at the beginning and we can access this form and set it equal to
a new form group,
so we create a new form group object.
This form group object or form group constructor I should say, takes a Javascript object
as an argument
and here we configure our form.
Now you can assign key value pairs here which describe your controls,
so for example if you want to add our title control, we would add title
and you don't have to wrap this in single quotation marks but it's considered a good practice to be
really safe that when your code is later compiled and optimized and uglified, that it's not accidentally,
well removing that name you give it here. So we can assign a name like this
and then here, we turn this into a new form control. Form control is another constructor
which also is imported from @angular/forms. The form control now creates a single control in the form and
form control takes a couple of arguments.
The first argument is the beginning form state and I will start with null by default to have an empty
input, the next argument allows us to attach validators or in general, form control options. Such
options would be a Javascript object and in that object, we can define things like asynchronous validators
which are validators that take time to finish and we'll add such an asynchronous validator later when
we create a validator for the mime type of the file we try to upload.
We got synchronous validators and we will actually add some of these synchronous validators, for example
here,
I want to add a validator for requiring title but before we do that, let's have a look at the last option
and that was updateOn. Now updateOn by default is changed,
so whenever you type, the validity is checked
but you could also set this to blur to only check the validity when you leave, when the focus leaves
that input for example
but I'll stick to the default. Now validators is an array of validators
we want to add and thankfully, Angular already ships with some built-in validators. We import the validators
class here from @angular/forms
and this gives us access to some built-in validators. And now we can add validators by simply accessing
validators. and then we get a couple of built-in ones like required.
Now important,
this is a method but you shouldn't execute it,
instead you just pass a reference to the method here and Angular will execute it on your behalf when it
checks the validity of that form control.
Now if you remember, we had not just the required validator for the title, we also had the minLength
validator,
so we can also add minLength here. Now minLength needs to be executed
because this actually is a factory function which will return the real validator function reference
and we need to execute it to configure the length and there, we could pass three.
Now let me quickly restructure that code so that it's easier to read
and now our title is initialized.
Now of course, we don't just have the title,
we also have the content and I see that my re-organization removed these quotation marks.
As I said, you can remove them, it's not a problem normally but you can also explicitly add them.
So now the content, it will also be a form control,
doesn't matter that it's a text area,
all inputs are form controls
and here, we also set null as an initial value and then we add our validators.
So we add an object where we set the validators to an array
and here, I just want to add validators required.
So now we got the same form as before basically
and let's finish that before we add our file upload. Of course the form is not done yet.
We have our form,
what we're missing is the connection to the template and what we're also missing is the part where we
can pre-populate these controls with concrete values in case we are editing a post, because we always
set the starting values to null but that of course is only correct if we are creating a new post.
Now to set an initial value, we can go to our subscription here where we got our post data here
and then we can reach out to our form which we initialized a couple of lines above and call set value
here. Set value allows you to override the values for your form controls you registered here,
so you pass a Javascript object here and you need to set a value for every form control.
So here we set the title and we simply set this to a string,
this post title and the same for content,
this post content. So with that, we're initialising our post here like that
and now I use the autoformat again which removed the quotation marks, so I'll stick to that for now and
leave it like this.
Again you could re-add those but now we're setting a value here, we're initializing the values in case
we got a loaded post.
Now when we save the post, we no longer get the form as an argument,
instead we have our own form object registered on our or as a property in our class, so we access it
with this form.
We still have the invalid property then and we can also still access the value property, so that works
exactly the same,
so value and then title. The value property will still be a Javascript object where our control names,
so the names we assign here, title and content map to names in that value object so that we can conveniently
access the values entered from the user or by the user on the same names here, title and content.
This of course means that if you were to change the names up here, then you also need to change them
down here when you access the values.
Now here I also will access this form value, title and content.
So now we're almost done. Now for resetting,
we just called this form reset, not reset form, it's just reset and now we're done with the Typescript
code.
Now what's missing is the part where we synchronize our HTML code to our Typescript,
so where we tell Angular which input here relates to which control we created here because you could
of course argue that the title control should obviously be that input because it has the name title but Angular
doesn't
infer this, it gives you the flexibility of defining no name here, you can now remove that or a different
name.
So instead of relying on something like this, what you do instead is you add a special directive here.
However first of all, you add a directive to your overall form, the form group directive. This form group
directive takes your form object,
so form here
because in Typescript we have that form property.
It takes this and basically tells Angular, hey for the form I created in Typescript, this is the HTML
form.
And now here on the input, we can use a different directive, form control name and type the name of the
control as we defined it here,
so title for example.
So now we pass title here and we're not wrapping this in square brackets because we're just passing
a string,
this is a shortcut,
you could wrap it in square brackets to do property binding
but then you would have to pass a string here with single quotation marks.
So here if you pass title, that's the equivalent,
so the other syntax is of course shorter which is why I'm using it like this
and now we connected this input to our form control. Now to hook up that error,
I now need to be able to access my title form control and we do this by accessing the overall form
and there, you have a get method which gives you access to a control where you pass the control name
as a title and then you should have an invalid property there because this will now be the form control
you selected and it checks if that is valid.
Now we can do the same for the text area and definitely feel free to do this on your own, pause the video,
do it on your own.
What I'll do is I'll add my form control name there too, the form control name directive and make sure
you get the casing correct here and the name of course is content there.
And now for the mat-error, I therefore access form get and then content as a string.
Now we should have a working form again,
we should be able to do everything we did before but now with the reactive approach.
So if we save everything and I try this, does this work? And we don't need to pick an image yet, we're not
handling it.
I can save this post and I see it here
and if I edit it and I add an extra exclamation mark, this also works.
So now we're having a working form again but with the reactive approach.
Well that's great but we haven't really advanced our app from a functionality perspective, right.
So time to go back to that image picker and finally take advantage of the reactive form and handle that
image picking.